JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We bring you the
"NewsHour"
tonight from the Quicken Loans
Arena in Cleveland,
Ohio, site of the 2016
Republican presidential
convention.
GWEN IFILL: It's day two of the
The theme of the night is jobs
and the economy.
And we will explore Donald
Trump's controversial
plans on immigration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, part two of
our biography
series on Trump digs into his
real estate
years. What does Trump's
business experience
say about his brand of politics?
GWENDA BLAIR, Author, "The
Trumps": He began
"The Apprentice," and that
turned out to be
terrific for him. It let him be
in American
living rooms every week being
the boss.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan
in Washington. Our Desperate
Journey series
tackles the deadly plight of
Libyan refugees
risking it all to escape
brutality and slavery.
DR. ERNA RIJNIERSE, Doctors
Without Borders:
It's very easy to say these
people shouldn't
come. But these people who say
that have never
been in a position where they
have to flee.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: This is the night
that Republicans
formally nominate Donald Trump
as their 2016
candidate for president. The
official roll
call of the states begins this
hour, but it
was overshadowed all day today
by uproar over
Melania Trump's speech last
night.
Correspondent John Yang reports
from Cleveland
on the events of day two.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I am officially running for
president of the
United States, and we are going
to make our
country great again.
JOHN YANG: Thirteen months ago,
Donald Trump
launched a long-shot campaign
for the Republican
nomination. Tonight, at Quicken
Loans Arena,
the prize is his.
Campaign manager Paul Manafort:
PAUL MANAFORT, Trump Convention
Manager: He's
excited about the fact that his
quest will
finally come to an end. And all
of you who
doubted that he could be
nominated will no
longer be able to say, yes, but
maybe it won't
happen. It will have happened.
JOHN YANG: The convention is
also nominating
Trump's running mate, Indiana
Governor Mike
Pence.
GOV. MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential
Candidate: This is no ordinary
time in the
life of our nation. The truth of
the matter
is, the agenda of Barack Obama
and Hillary
Clinton has weakened America's
place in world
and stifled our nation's
economy.
JOHN YANG: After the roll call,
the convention
gets down to the theme for the
night, make
America work again. A list of
speakers will
take aim at President Obama's
economic record,
including House Speaker Paul
Ryan and Senate
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.
Both leaders have endorsed
Trump, even as
they continue to criticize some
of his rhetoric.
The convention will also hear
from one-time
Trump rivals Ben Carson and
Chris Christie,
both now campaign surrogates.
Away from the
convention hall, protests
continue, amid heavy
security.
Here on Cleveland's Public
Square, there's
a lot of emotion, both for and
against Donald
Trump. But it's mostly been
peaceful. Cleveland
police report only a very small
number of
arrests for they say are minor
issues.
Today, much of the focus was on
last night's
speech by Melania Trump. Two
passages were
strikingly similar to the speech
Michelle
Obama gave at the Democratic
Convention in
2008.
MELANIA TRUMP, Wife of Donald
Trump: My parents
impressed on me the values that
you work hard
for what you want in life, that
your word
is your bond, and you do what
you say, and
keep your promise, that you
treat people with
respect.
MICHELLE OBAMA, First Lady:
Barack and I were
raised with so many of the same
values, like
you work hard for what you want
in life, that
your word is your bond, that you
do what you
say you're going to do, that you
treat people
with dignity and respect.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Campaign manager
Manafort argued
it's all been blown out of
proportion.
PAUL MANAFORT: We don't believe
there's anything
in that speech that doesn't
reflect her thinking.
The fact that there are things
like care and
respect and compassion, you
know, you know
those are not extraordinary
words.
JOHN YANG: He suggested the
criticism was
prompted by Hillary Clinton, and
that she
tries to destroy women who
threaten her. Clinton
herself was campaigning in Las
Vegas today.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Last night in Cleveland was
surreal. I kept
thinking, what's this like? You
know, lots
of sound and fury, even a fog
machine, but
when you pulled back the
curtain, it was just
Donald Trump with nothing to
offer the American
people.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Trump stayed largely
out of sight.
He will appear in the convention
hall tonight
by satellite from New York,
introducing Senator
McConnell.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang in Cleveland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And let's go down
to the convention
floor now.
NPR "Weekend Edition Sunday"
host Rachel Martin
will be with us this week and
next for our
joint "PBS NewsHour"-NPR
coverage of the conventions.
Rachel, what can we expect
tonight?
RACHEL MARTIN: Good evening,
Judy.
So, it has all been building up
to this moment
actually for the Republican
Party. After so
many months, it all gets down to
what is about
to happen, which is the final
roll call vote.
Donald Trump's name has
officially been placed
into nomination. Senator Jeff
Sessions of
Alabama made that happen, and we
are expecting
the final roll call vote to
happen momentarily.
This is when each state gets
their moment.
They send their representative
to the microphone
to declare their state's pick
for president.
That will put Donald Trump over
the edge;
1,237, 1,237 is the magic
number. We have
been hearing about that number,
of course,
for months. New York state is --
his home
state is expected to send him
over that threshold.
Of course, you have heard how
the Trump campaign
has established a theme for
every night. Tonight,
as we know, is make America work
again. We're
going to hear an awful lot about
the economy
and trade in particular. Donald
Trump has
made that a platform in his
campaign, speaking
out against America's free trade
agreements.
We will hear about that.
We are also going to hear from
some very important
establishment Republicans. Chris
Christie,
of course, will be speaking,
also Senate Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell, who has
been a very
reluctant supporter of Donald
Trump, and,
of course, Speaker of the House
Paul Ryan,
also a reluctant supporter of
Donald Trump
who has been very critical of
him even recently.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
RACHEL MARTIN: As you can tell,
the excitement
building in the hall.
It will be up to those
Republicans to try
to bring this party together, a
party that
has been divided even in the
last few days
of this convention. That's what
coming up.
GWEN IFILL: Thank you, Rachel. A
lot of noise
going on around you, as they get
ready to
nominate their candidate
tonight. Thanks.
We will talk to you later.
Now we turn to the battle for
the young voters,
an increasingly important
demographic that
both parties are relying on to
win in November.
Lisa Desjardins reports from
Cleveland here
on why millennial voters have
proved so difficult
for Republicans to capture in
recent years.
LISA DESJARDINS: Their
generation is poised
to become a major political
force. This year,
millennials, the group between
18 and 35 years
old, make up about a third of
all eligible
voters.
That's now the same percentage
as baby boomers.
A recent Harvard Institute of
Politics poll
found young voters prefer
presumptive Democratic
presidential nominee Hillary
Clinton by a
nearly 2-1 margin over her
opponent, Republican
Donald Trump.
JACE LAQUERRE, Student Delegate:
We're really
excited to show you around the
RNC this week.
LISA DESJARDINS: Young
Republican delegates
are thinking about how to change
that.
JACE LAQUERRE: I think the
Republican Party
does have an image with young
people. We need
to work on a number of things.
LISA DESJARDINS:
Seventeen-year-old high school
student Jace Laquerre of Vermont
is one of
the youngest delegates here this
week. And
he has a message to GOP leaders
about his
generation.
JACE LAQUERRE: The top three
things that are
important to us is the economy.
We're pro-life
and we want a more tolerant
party to the LGBT
community and other groups.
LISA DESJARDINS: Social issues
like LGBT rights
are a key with younger voters.
Rachel Hoff is an openly guy
delegate from
Washington, D.C.
RACHEL HOFF, District of
Columbia Delegate:
A majority of young Republicans
now support
marriage equality; 60 percent of
the country
now supports marriage quality.
LISA DESJARDINS: Hoff
unsuccessfully fought
at this convention to try to
soften the party's
platform.
RACHEL HOFF: Support for
allowing same-sex
couples the freedom to marry has
grown substantially
in our own party.
LISA DESJARDINS: Instead, it
became more conservative.
RACHEL HOFF: The folks that
would still like
to deny same-sex marriage are
over-represented
in the party's platform
committee, and in
some ways that committee is
actually out of
step with the party as a whole.
But it won't be long before a
majority of
the Republican Party as a whole
supports marriage
equality.
LISA DESJARDINS: Donald Trump
has talked more
recently about respecting gay
rights, even
as he sees gay marriage as a
state issue.
But for Jesse Purdon, a
34-year-old alternate
delegate from Florida, the party
needs to
rethink immigration.
JESSE PURDON, Florida Alternate
Delegate:
Being a Latino in the Republican
Party isn't
the easiest thing in the world
this election
cycle.
I mean, it's just honest.
Continually railing
on Mexico and saying all the
horrible things
that we say about them is not
the type of
message that resonates, well,
not only with
Mexicans, but the Latino
population in total,
because they feel they're all
being painted
with one broad brush.
LISA DESJARDINS: Republicans are
focusing
on social and digital media,
trying to reach
young people on the playing
field where they
spend the most time, but many
say that's not
enough.
FRANK LUNTZ, Founder, Luntz
Global: We're
not visual enough.
LISA DESJARDINS: Frank Luntz is
a Republican
pollster, and he believes the
party has a
messaging problem with young
voters.
FRANK LUNTZ: They reject,
frankly, Republicans
on social issues, they reject
Democrats on
economic issues, which is what
makes them
in play.
LISA DESJARDINS: And it is the
economic issues
that make 30-year-old Nick Ochs
a decided
Trump fan.
NICK OCHS, Trump Volunteer:
Immediately, I
saw a plan to bring back a
manufacturing base
to America. And that's what the
economy needs
now.
WILLIAM CARTER, Georgia
Delegate: I think
Donald Trump's message is
resonating so well
because it's not what a
well-versed politician
would say.
LISA DESJARDINS: William Carter,
an 18-year-old
delegate from Georgia, believes
Donald Trump
is precisely the right candidate
for his generation.
WILLIAM CARTER: He doesn't jump
around the
issues. And his avoidance of
jumping around
the issues and telling it like
it is, I think
that allows millennials to go,
wow, he really
understands what's going on and
he isn't afraid
to say what he wants to say in
order to get
the point across.
LISA DESJARDINS: A major
challenge for the
party is how to get more young
people on board
during this and future
elections.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins
in Cleveland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we turn
our focus now
to a major tenet of Trump's
domestic policy,
immigration.
It's a subject that's split
Republicans for
years. George W. Bush failed to
pass reform,
and there is a divide between
what he advocated
for and what's in Trump's
platform right now.
We get two views, Republican
congressman Tom
Marino of Pennsylvania, and
Daniel Garza.
He's the executive director of
The LIBRE Initiative.
That is the largest conservative
Hispanic
political group in the country.
Welcome to both of you.
DANIEL GARZA, Executive
Director, The LIBRE
Initiative: Thank you.
REP. TOM MARINO (R),
Pennsylvania: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me start with
you, Congressman
Marino.
What most people know about
Donald Trump and
immigration is, he's going to
build a huge
wall that's going to run the
length of the
border with Mexico, and he's
going to deport
all 11 million illegal or
undocumented immigrants.
Is that pretty much all there
is?
REP. TOM MARINO: No, it's not
all there is.
You know, as far as deporting 11
million people,
you have got to realize that the
numbers that
we're talking about, about half
-- or even
not half of those individuals
are on visas
that have expired.
And that's one good way that we
can address
the issue. Call those people in,
let's review
it, where are you? What are you
doing? And
that's going to have a factor on
it. But do
we need a wall in between the
United States
and Mexico? Absolutely, we need
a wall. We
see what's coming into the
country. We see
how open the borders are.
That's the main point of a
problem, but we
need to have more security
there. We need
to be screening people. Look, I
was a U.S.
attorney for years, and I worked
with Border
Patrol, I worked with the ICE
people.
And I'm hearing now consistently
that they
can't detain people, they can't
stop people
from coming in. And we need to
be checking
anyone coming in this country.
We need to
do a background check on
everyone. I don't
care what race they are, what
country they
come from. We have to be strong
on border
security. Terrorists are coming
into this
country. Look at the criminals
that have come
in and murdered people.
GWEN IFILL: Let me give Daniel
Garza a chance
to respond, because you're in a
particularly
unique position, because you
represent a Latino,
Hispanic group -- Latino
conservative group,
and you know that 84 percent of
Hispanics
are saying they're not so
pleased with the
Republican Party right now.
How do you bridge the gap
between what you
hear the congressman saying and
what you're
saying to your constituency?
DANIEL GARZA: Well, we will
continue to do
what we have always done, which
is to advance
ideas, policies that are going
to eliminate
barriers to opportunity, that
are going to
increase educational
opportunities to folks.
Look, there is no secret that we
have made
very public our opposition to
Donald Trump's
stated positions on immigration.
We feel that
they are counterproductive, that
they would
interrupt our economy, and would
rip families
apart.
So, what we want to see is some
alternative
policy position that is actually
more sensible,
that is market-based and that
actually addresses
market forces, but also keeps
families together.
That's important for us, because
a lot of
the children of the undocumented
folks are
citizens, and I think we should
be working
towards policies that induce
family cohesion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman
Marino, what about
that? Can there be some moderate
modification
of what Donald Trump and you
believe to accommodate
the kinds of things...
(CROSSTALK)
REP. TOM MARINO: Well, there
always has to
be discussion and
opened-mindedness.
And Donald will be opened-minded
about discussion.
But what do you tell the people?
I just was
at a swearing-in in my state,
where there
were 35 people sworn in as
American citizens.
What do you tell those people
that wait in
line and have waited in line for
years? They
did it the legitimate way. They
did it the
legal way.
There's no -- we cannot and we
shouldn't accept
the fact that, because they're
here, that
justifies the fact that we
should violate
the laws that we have in place.
And it's unfair
to anyone else who wants to come
into this
country legally. But we need to
work together
to do this.
GWEN IFILL: You talk about
working together.
Unity has been a theme of this
convention.
Daniel Garza -- and,
Congressman, I want you
weigh in on this -- how is it
possible? How
do you end up in the same place?
DANIEL GARZA: The consensus is
what worries
me about Hillary Clinton, for
example, on
the issue of immigration.
She is promising Latinos, if you
vote for
me, I will get you immigration
reform. What
she doesn't tell Latinos is, if
you vote for
me, I will give you immigration
reform, as
long as I get everything I want.
GWEN IFILL: Well, what about
your party?
DANIEL GARZA: You have a
Republican House
majority and a Republican Senate
majority.
You both have to come to the
middle. That
means either Donald Trump, who
has taken a
harsh position, or Hillary
Clinton, who is
writing a check she cannot cash,
and she knows
it.
GWEN IFILL: But where is that
middle ground,
Congressman?
REP. TOM MARINO: That middle
ground comes
-- we don't know where it's at
this point.
DANIEL GARZA: I could provide
it...
(CROSSTALK)
REP. TOM MARINO: But individuals
like you
and Donald Trump and myself and
other people
who are working on this issue,
we need to
sit down in a room, check the
egos at the
door, lock the door, and say
we're not coming
out of here until we get this
resolved.
And to make promises -- look,
the Democrats
and Hillary Clinton are making
-- are promising
things that they can't produce,
they shouldn't
produce.
DANIEL GARZA: They're pandering,
flat out.
REP. TOM MARINO: They're
pandering.
And also what they're doing is,
you think
they're really concerned about
having new
immigrants come into this
country and become
Americans? No, because it's the
greatest voter
registration scam that you would
ever see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But what's the
holdup, then?
Is that the holdup?
DANIEL GARZA: Well, what you
have is, on the
one side, you have a fixed
position of immediate
citizenship. On the other side,
you have the
concern that you have to address
market forces.
So, what we're saying, OK, if we
cannot achieve
the optimum, ideal situation of
a path to
citizenship, then what is the
next best thing
that's acceptable? And for us,
individual
sovereignty is important. And
that means that
a work visa bill that would
include circularity,
job mobility, family
unification, and, if
you're not going to be
advantaged to get in
front of the line, at least
you're not disadvantaged
by getting in back of the line.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: It sounds like a
priority question,
though. Is it securing borders
which is the
most important part or this idea
about work...
(CROSSTALK)
DANIEL GARZA: I don't want
securing borders
to hold up the other pieces.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what about
that?
(CROSSTALK)
REP. TOM MARINO: I have many,
many hardworking
Hispanics in my district.
I have a very agricultural
district. They
come in on the visa program. We
should make
it simpler for them to come in
on a visa program.
DANIEL GARZA: Yes.
REP. TOM MARINO: They pick
crops. They work
in our hotels. They send money
back. They
pay taxes. They send money back
home. Sometimes,
they go back home, then they
come seasonally.
DANIEL GARZA: Like my parents,
who were farmworkers.
REP. TOM MARINO: Exactly.
And my grandparents came into
the country
the legal way. But we have an
issue here,
where both sides just are not
listening to
each other. There are promises.
There are
pandering. The pandering is
making it extremely
difficult. Donald has changed
his position.
Just like -- he says, yes, we
need to review
this process but we first...
(CROSSTALK)
DANIEL GARZA: The last thing
that was similar
to what Donald Trump is
proposing is Proposition
187.
I will remind you that, in 1990,
Republicans
lost a governor position in
California by
six points. By 1994, they lost
it by 46 points,
and 61 points four years later.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And why isn't
that a lesson
for Donald Trump?
REP. TOM MARINO: It's not a
lesson.
What it is, is an example of how
the Democrats
have been pandering, pandering
to the Hispanics
about how to get into this
country and not
follow the law.
Let me come back here a little
bit. All three,
Obama, Bush and Clinton, should
have dealt
with these issues, and they
haven't.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: I guess my question,
though, is,
we're at the Republican National
Convention.
And I would really like to hear
how you're
going to deal with these issues,
not spend
a lot of time talking about what
is going
to happen -- what the other guys
are going
to do. They will have their
opportunity next
week.
DANIEL GARZA: That's been my
concern with
the Trump candidacy, that we get
a lot of
10,000-foot-level kind of
rhetoric, but we
never get specifics on issues
like taxes and
regulations on school choice, on
eminent domain,
on many issues that matter to
Latinos, the
economy, education, health care,
the security
of the country.
I want specifics, so I can have
the certainty
of who I'm voting for. I haven't
heard...
JUDY WOODRUFF: One final word,
quick.
REP. TOM MARINO: OK.
Talk about specifics. What we
need to do is
-- we can't do comprehensive.
This is too
complicated. We sit down and we
list the most
important issues from one to 10,
and we start
ticking them off one by one.
DANIEL GARZA: Love it.
REP. TOM MARINO: And by the time
we get to
10, we're going to have the
problem resolved.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman Tom
Marino, thank
you.
Daniel Garza, we thank you both.
DANIEL GARZA: Pleasure.
GWEN IFILL: Thank you both very
much.
Tonight, however, we continue
our series exploring
Donald Trump's life, his
transformation from
a borough kid in Queens to a
presidential
contender who has taken the
party by storm.
In this second installment, we
look at the
rise of the Trump brand, the
boom, the bankruptcies,
and his celebrity reemergence.
Long before his name became a
household one,
Donald Trump, fresh out of
business school,
was already drawn to Manhattan's
flashiest
lights, those on the Great White
Way.
MICHAEL D'ANTONIO, Trump
Biographer: He was
always intrigued by performance,
and the very
first business activity he
really got involved
with was the production of a
Broadway play.
GWEN IFILL: That's author
Michael D'Antonio.
The play, which Trump backed in
1970, was
"Paris Is Out." But the
theatrical venture
closed almost as quickly as it
opened, so
Trump retreated to his roots.
MICHAEL D'ANTONIO: When he
eventually turned
toward the family business in
real estate
in the early 1970s, he was
determined to use
celebrity to help build the
business. And
I think he understood that you
could be a
real estate developer in
Manhattan and also
be famous.
GWEN IFILL: Enter Donald Trump,
the builder:
cushioned against risk by his
father's wealth
and political connections, yet
still longing
for a piece of Manhattan
glamour.
Writer Gwenda Blair:
GWENDA BLAIR, Author, "The
Trumps": When Donald
came to Manhattan in the
mid-'70s, New York
City was in terrible financial
straits, on
the verge of bankruptcy. The
people who dealt
with him in those early days
said he just
jumped through the phone. He was
so competitive,
so ambitious, so eager, that he
just jumped
into the spotlight. Every
possibility to get
any kind of attention, he went
for it.
GWEN IFILL: His first major
project was the
old Commodore Hotel, a crumbling
eyesore in
the heart of the city that sat
abandoned next
to Grand Central Station.
Author Timothy O'Brien:
TIMOTHY O'BRIEN, Author,
"TrumpNation": He
partnered on it with the
Pritzker family that
owned the Hyatt hotel chain. The
Grand Hyatt
was really Donald Trump coming
onto the scene
in New York, and Donald Trump
first coming
into the public eye.
GWENDA BLAIR: This was shiny,
glass, lots
of brass, stuck out in the
middle of Manhattan.
And this began his whole career
of exaggeration,
truthful hyperbole, as he calls
it, in which
everything he does is the best,
the best of
the best, the biggest of the
biggest.
GWEN IFILL: Before the project
was even completed,
The New York Times was already
branding Trump
New York's number one real
estate promoter,
describing him in one profile as
tall, lean
and blond, and resembling Robert
Redford.
He rapidly climbed New York's
social ladder,
becoming a regular in its most
exclusive clubs,
hobnobbing with movie stars and
models, like
Ivana Zelnickova, who he married
in 1977.
MICHAEL D'ANTONIO: This was his
ambition,
to find just the right beautiful
young woman
who would fill out the picture
of the successful
man on the rise. He followed her
back to Canada,
where she lived, and courted her
pretty avidly.
And before you know it, Ivana is
being presented
with a prenuptial agreement that
will set
the parameters for her marriage
to Donald
and her partnership with him.
GWEN IFILL: But controversy
followed Trump
wherever he went, including
public outcry
over what was to become his
signature property,
Fifth Avenue's Trump Tower. The
old building
facade had historic limestone
friezes that
the Metropolitan Museum of Art
wanted to preserve,
but that would've added time to
the project.
TIMOTHY O'BRIEN: Donald is a
notoriously impatient
person, and so, in the dead of
night one night,
he brought in a team of illegal
Polish migrant
workers, who sledgehammered the
friezes into
dust and took them down. So,
embedded in this
triumph that is Trump Tower is
also this early
warning sign that you have
someone who doesn't
really play well with the other
children,
and is willing to literally
pound something
into dust to get his own way.
GWEN IFILL: As banks continued
to open their
coffers with loans, he went on a
shopping
spree.
TIMOTHY O'BRIEN: He used this
gigantic free
piggy bank, essentially, to buy
an airline,
the Trump Shuttle, to buy a
hotel, the Plaza
Hotel, to buy a football team,
the USFL Generals.
And then, when he goes into
Atlantic City,
he ultimately acquires a whole
string of casinos
there, using borrowed money as
well.
GWEN IFILL: Those casinos, and
many of his
other businesses, closed one by
one, often
amid bankruptcy claims and
unpaid debt.
In 1989, Trump played a
controversial role
in one of the decade's most
notorious crime
cases, when five black teenagers
were accused
of attacking a white female
jogger in Central
Park. Trump stirred what quickly
became a
boiling pot over criminal
justice and race,
weighing on in the pages of The
New York Daily
News.
GWENDA BLAIR: The case of the
Central Park
jogger, he took out a full-page
ad demanding
that whoever did this should be
sent to the
death chamber, the kids who were
arrested,
and later exonerated, by the
way.
GWEN IFILL: None of this slowed
Trump's rise.
In fact, the New York tabloids
thrived on
his exploits, breathlessly
tracking his marriages
to Ivana and Marla Maples, his
divorces from
both, and now, his third and
current marriage
to Melania Trump. Then, in 2004:
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
You're fired.
GWEN IFILL: The Trump brand
found its ideal
niche, in a wildly popular
prime-time program
that celebrated everything he
had come to
represent.
DONALD TRUMP: I'm looking for
the apprentice.
GWEN IFILL: Wealth, celebrity,
business success
and toughness.
GWENDA BLAIR: He began "The
Apprentice," and
that turned out to be terrific
for him.
It let him be in American living
rooms every
week being the boss, being the
guy in charge,
being the guy who hires people
and fires people.
When he first started that, was
he thinking,
aha, straight off to the White
House? We can't
say. But, certainly, 10 years
in, that whole
decade of people seeing him as
the boss, as
the CEO, has certainly made the
idea of his
moving into the Oval Office seem
a matter
of course.
GWEN IFILL: From the corner
office to the
Oval Office suddenly didn't seem
that far
a leap.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And part of a
fascinating series
of looks at the life of Donald
Trump.
Happening right now on the
convention floor,
the delegates are taking the
roll call state
by state, casting their votes to
formally
nominate Donald Trump as the
Republican candidate
for president.
Our Lisa Desjardins is down
there.
Lisa, we heard a few mild boos a
minute ago.
What was that all about?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
What those boos are, Judy and
Gwen, are the
cracks in the Republican surface
coming to
bear. Some of these states have
divided delegations,
Judy and Gwen. And some of them
are voting
not majority for Trump.
Other delegations say they're
not able to
cast their votes the way they
want. You might
have a delegation where the
primary went overwhelmingly
for Donald Trump, but a delegate
in their
own heart says, I don't want
support Donald
Trump, and they're trying to
vote a different
way.
So that fracture is coming to
surface, as
some of these delegates are
trying to object
to the way this roll call is
being handled.
I will also say, even though
those boos were
allowed, it's a minority so far
of the delegates,
but it's very significant.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, Lisa,
I was reading
a little bit of the noise from
Ohio and a
little bit from Colorado. We can
explore that
as the night goes on.
But, right now, we want to bring
in our regulars
who are joining us every night
here at the
convention, Mark Shields, who is
a syndicated
columnist and also with the
"NewsHour," David
Brooks, columnist with The New
York Times,
Amy Walter of The Cook Political
Report.
To all three of you, we're
waiting for Donald
Trump to be nominated, but today
has been
pretty much consumed with a lot
of conversation
about what his wife said in her
speech last
night and whether there was any
similarity
with the speech given by
Michelle Obama in
2008.
David, is this something that is
going to
put a blemish on the whole
affair?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I think so.
It was plagiarism.
I thought it was pretty clear.
I think it says a couple things.
First, the
staff is not that good. This is
an outsider
campaign. They haven't hired the
best people,
the professionals, and so that
showed. Whoever
did it, it was a big mess-up
that no professional
would do.
Second, they couldn't admit it.
They couldn't
just say, OK, we messed up,
we're firing somebody,
we admit it, we're moving on,
because that's
not Donald Trump's persona.
And, third, I have a feeling
that the shoe
is yet to drop, that somewhere
in this country,
Donald Trump is sitting there,
wanting to
defend his wife's honor, wanting
-- getting
mad because people are attacking
his family,
and, somehow, he is going to
riff on this.
And it might be Thursday night
in the hall
or it might be somewhere else,
but there will
be another little mini-bomb,
when Donald Trump
reacts.
GWEN IFILL: Late last night, we
were sitting
around here at this table and we
were talking
about missed opportunities on
the opening
day of the convention.
Is this another one, Amy?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Absolutely.
And we talked yesterday about
the unity, and
we were talking to Lisa
Desjardins right now
about, is this party unified?
Right now, we're having an
instance where
the campaign isn't even unified.
Part of the
problem with the speech and the
reaction to
the speech was that the campaign
started pointing
fingers at each other. And it
became a circular
firing squad. This is the thing
that David
is talking about.
In professional campaigns, this
is not supposed
to happen. So it is one more
example of a
campaign that is yet to get on
message. They're
going to get their take two on
unity tonight,
but they still have not nailed
that down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, how do you
see this?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, what happens
at conventions,
historically, Republican and
Democratic, nobody
speaks a word that hasn't been
vetted and
hasn't been re-vetted.
It isn't spontaneous. You don't
get up there
and chat. This should have been,
and it wasn't.
And this was the introduction of
the candidate's
wife, who is not a public
person, who made
a positive contribution, who was
quite appealing.
And it turns out that she's --
and said she
had written the speech herself.
And it turns out that large
segments and large
paragraphs borrowed directly
from Michelle
Obama's 2008 speech. And you're
right. Somebody
has to go. But Donald Trump has
never admitted.
He refused last week to admit it
was a mistake
to say that John McCain wasn't a
hero.
GWEN IFILL: Here we are the
night of the big
nomination, when usually it's
just our candidate
is so fabulous. There is nothing
that could
possibly go wrong.
And, instead, we have mild boos.
We have people
who still feel like they have
been shut out
of the process. Is that where
this party is
now, or are we just looking at
something that
is going to blow over?
AMY WALTER: That is the
definition of this
party right now. It is not a
unified party.
In fact, the only thing that is
unifying this
party -- and you're going to
hear it, I think,
again tonight -- we heard it
yesterday -- is
deep dislike of Hillary Clinton.
Take that
away, and on policy, on
strategy, on direction
for the country, this is a party
that is just
literally splintered.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I guess that
raises the
question, David, is that going
to be enough?
We certainly heard over-the-top
language about
Hillary Clinton, she should be
in prison and
a lot other tough words about
her. Is that
going to be enough?
DAVID BROOKS: To unify the
party?
JUDY WOODRUFF: To unify the
party.
DAVID BROOKS: I don't think so.
You have got to remember how
many people are
not here. It's really striking.
You hang around
the press areas at these
conventions, there's
usually a lot of people to
schmooze with who
are, like, at the Republican
Conventions every
year -- or every four years --
and you see
them and you get some
information from them.
The hallways are sort of empty,
because those
people are not here. Second, a
lot of people
are not in the hall. I had
coffee with a delegate
today who sort of had his
credentials sort
of ripped away. And so that's --
a little
of that is happening. And...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why were his
credentials taken
away?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, he said some
unfortunate
things in the press, I guess.
And so that
sort of thing is happening.
And then so there is still a lot
of people
-- you know, President Bush
apparently, reportedly,
wondering whether he will be the
last Republican
president. So, that stuff is
happening in
the party.
GWEN IFILL: You know what? If
they start taking
away credentials, David, from
people who have
said unfortunate things in the
press, we will
be keeping an eye on you.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: We will watching you
very carefully.
But, Mark Shields, is there
where we are now?
And is there a way for the GOP
to reposition
itself? We saw the governor of
Ohio is off
worrying about down-ballot
races, as are so
many other Republicans. Is that
the salvation?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
No, obviously, and Mitch
McConnell is here
tonight, who has spoken openly,
and not a
man known for speaking openly,
about his serious
problems with Donald Trump, and
Donald Trump's
slurring of large groups of
people, and his
insulting of his opponents, his
defeated opponents.
And that's what Mitch McConnell
is all about,
is preserving the Senate
majority and hoping
desperately for ticket-splitting
to reemerge.
I think that -- I think the
delegate thing
is quite overstated. I will be
honest with
you. I have great respect for
Lisa, but the
reality is delegates lost their
standing and
conventions lost their standing
in 1972.
That's when we went to direct
primary election
-- nomination of presidential
candidates.
Donald Trump won 3,700. He is
the nominee.
He is the commanding figure in
this party.
So, someone can stand up and
say, I object.
Fine. God bless them. But the
reality is,
he really did win a compelling
victory.
You could get in a car in
Concord, New Hampshire,
and drive all the way to
Shreveport, Louisiana,
and never go through a state
that Donald Trump
didn't carry.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, he may be
the commanding
figure, but there clearly are
clearly elements
of the party, which is what
we're talking
about here, who are not happy
that he's the
commanding figure. They don't
want him being
the face of the Republican
party.
AMY WALTER: This is what is
going to be interesting
to watch for tonight.
You have not only the Senate
majority leader,
but you have the speaker of the
House, Paul
Ryan, coming up and speaking,
and Kevin McCarthy.
GWEN IFILL: Who is the chairman
of the convention.
AMY WALTER: Who is the chairman
And Kevin McCarthy, who is
second in command
in the House. They are all very
concerned
about what happens to
down-ballot races. Listening
to how they are going to thread
the needle,
as they have had to do
throughout this campaign,
between supporting the ticket,
wanting to
support their nominee, making
sure that turnout
doesn't go down, but also, as
Paul Ryan has
talked about, allowing his
members to -- quote,
unquote -- "vote their
conscience."
If they don't want to support
the person on
the top of the ticket, they
don't have to,
if they think it will help them.
GWEN IFILL: I think every single
conversation
we have had with a Republican in
this booth,
when we ask them about the
issues, they have
always turned it back to talking
about Hillary
Clinton.
AMY WALTER: Right.
GWEN IFILL: And that does seem
to be the most
persuasive argument, David, that
Republicans
in this room have, which is, he
may not be
everything we want him to be, I
may not have
voted for him, I may not have
endorsed him
until last month, but we really,
really, really
can't have Hillary Clinton.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. No, I think
that's part
of it.
It's funny. In talking to --
when you run
into a senator or something in
the hallway
here and you ask them about
Trump, it's like
they want you to know they
really don't like
Trump, so -- but they can't
really say it,
so they got this little dance
they do, this
body language.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And these are the
ones who
are here.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, exactly,
right, but sort
of a squirming little thing.
But...
GWEN IFILL: I want to see that
again.
DAVID BROOKS: And then the other
thing, the
Republicans here, and a lot of
people who
are Trump delegates, they're
party institutionalists.
They believe in this party. And
it would be
hard for them not to be
themselves and not
be loyal to it.
GWEN IFILL: Well, we're going to
pick up where
we left off here, because
there's going to
be a lot to talk about tonight.
Stay with us, beginning at 8:00
p.m. Eastern
time, for our special NPR/"PBS
NewsHour" coverage
of the Republican presidential
convention
here in Cleveland.
Now we go back to hari in
Washington, D.C.,
at our headquarters for the
day's other news.
HARI SREENIVASAN: President
Obama spoke by
phone today with Turkish
President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan. The U.S. Justice and
State Departments
are reviewing Turkey's
extradition request
for Fethullah Gulen, the man the
country says
is responsible for the attempted
coup last
week.
And in its aftermath, the
crackdown has only
intensified, with thousands more
civil servants
suspended from their jobs today,
in addition
to the thousands already under
detention.
For more, we're joined now from
Istanbul by
special correspondent Marcia
Biggs.
Marcia, you're standing in front
what looks
like, what -- is this a
pro-Erdogan rally?
MARCIA BIGGS: Indeed, Hari.
This is the largest protest of
the last five
days. The first night, as you
will remember,
on Friday night, when the coup
was attempted,
President Erdogan called on his
people to
come down to the streets to save
democracy,
as he said, to protect him, to
protect the
government, and this is the
fifth day.
People have come down in droves
every single
day. And this is by far the
largest. I would
say maybe 3,000 people are here
tonight. The
mood is one of nationalism, the
Turkish flags,
a lot of saving the fatherland.
What is very interesting is that
Erdogan sent
messages, text messages to his
people, to
the citizens of Turkey today,
saying, please
come down to the streets, as he
has every
day, to save the fatherland, to
save democracy.
And out they have come.
Public transportation has been
free every
day. Indeed, I took the ferry
and I took a
tram today, paid no money, and
that is to
encourage people to come down
into the streets.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tell me about
the impact.
Is there an impact that you can
feel, though,
the people that you talk to can
feel about
all these detentions and
firings?
MARCIA BIGGS: The crackdown over
the last
couple of days has been brutal,
as you mentioned,
30,000 suspensions of various
ministries,
police and education.
That's the people who work in
the prime minister's
office, judges, prosecutors,
15,000, as you
mentioned, members of the
Education Ministry;
1,500 deans were asked to
resign, and that's
in addition to the 1,000
civilians that were
arrested and the 6,000 soldiers
that were
arrested.
That's 50,000 people in this
country that
have been affected by this
crackdown, whether
it's being fired, whether it's
being asked
to resign, whether it's being
detained. It's
incredible.
And, basically, the feeling that
I have gotten
from people is just get a
wait-and-see attitude.
There is a lot of fear for
those, anyone who
is opposed to Erdogan, of
course. It was also
announced today that any media
organization
with any ties to Fethullah Gulen
could lose
their broadcasting rights if
they say anything
that's critical of the
government.
There were a couple of arrests
for people
who put on social media
criticisms of President
Erdogan. So, there is a lot of
fear, not among
this crowd, of course, because
they are here
in support of their president,
but on the
other side, there's a lot of
fear and not
a lot of talk, from what I have
heard, just
a lot of wait and see.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
All right, so tell us about a
little bit about
Fethullah Gulen. What do his
followers believe?
MARCIA BIGGS: Well, Fethullah
Gulen is known
mostly for his network of
schools here in
Turkey.
He and Erdogan were closely
allied, until
a couple of years ago, when
there was a very
bitter split over another case
against rogue
elements in the military, as
well as corruption
charges. He's in self-imposed
exile, as you
know, in the United States.
But members of the police, of
education systems
here in Turkey are a product of
his schools.
So, Erdogan supporters believe
that it is
his followers that could create
this network
of conspiracy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, are the
people behind
you concerned about some of the
nationalist
rhetoric that's coming up right
now? Erdogan
has said on TV in the past
couple of days
that he wants to reinstitute the
death penalty.
That has got consequences if
Turkey wants
to be a part of the E.U.
MARCIA BIGGS: I would not say
that they're
concerned.
I would say that they are
repeating anything
and everything that he says.
Indeed, yesterday,
in this square, not with these
kinds of crowds,
but the same mood, you had
people hanging
and burning in effigy of Gulen
and shouting
very inflamed rhetoric about
bringing back
the death penalty.
So, no, I do not believe, from
what I have
seen, that the people behind me
are concerned
about this. I would say that
they are repeating
it loudly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Marcia Biggs
joining us
from Istanbul, thanks so much.
MARCIA BIGGS: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And in other
news: The White
House released an open letter
from President
Obama to law enforcement
officers. In it,
he again condemned attacks on
police, and
said -- quote -- "We have your
backs."
He echoed that message today
after a briefing
with FBI Director James Comey
and Attorney
General Loretta Lynch, among
others.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I strong believe that there's no
contradiction
between us protecting our
officers, honoring
our officers, making sure that
they have all
the tools that they need to do
their jobs
safely, and building trust
between police
officers and departments and the
communities
that they serve.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Administration
officials
are also under pressure to
illuminate the
White House in blue light to
honor police
officers.
Meanwhile, a policeman was
killed in Kansas
City, Kansas, today. Officials
say he was
gunned down as he approached
possible suspects
in an earlier shooting.
There's word that American-led
airstrikes
in Northern Syria killed scores
of civilians
today. Opposition activists say
at least 56
died in air raids aimed at
Islamic State forces.
They pounded villages near the
ISIS stronghold
of Manbij. In addition to the
dead, dozens
were wounded. A news agency
linked to the
militants said the death toll
was closer to
160.
ISIS claimed responsibility
today for last
night's rampage on a train in
Germany. The
group posted video of the
attacker, an Afghan
refugee vowing to take revenge
on infidels.
He was killed by police near
Wurzburg after
slashing passengers.
Rohit Kachroo of Independent
Television News
reports.
ROHIT KACHROO: He calls himself
a soldier
of the caliphate and promises
attacks in every
village and city, and with a
knife in his
hand, he says he's preparing for
a suicide
mission. It was a knife and an
axe that he
used to slash passengers on an
intercity train
last night, shouting "God is
great."
GERHARD KALLERT, Regional Police
President
(through translator): We have
some very badly
injured people, five in total.
ROHIT KACHROO: And yet
intelligence services
have concluded there was no
evidence of direct
contact between him and I.S.
The interior minister said a
text in Pashto
was found that was partly
written in Arabic
characters, partly in Latin
characters, which
indicates that this could be
someone who was
self-radicalized recently.
A jihadist made in his bedroom,
home alone,
they thought, he traveled to
Germany on his
own. This morning, an I.S. flag
was found
in his room.
This was his home until a
fortnight ago, at
an accomadation center where he
lived alongide
dozens of other refugees. What
counterterrorism
officers are here trying to
understand is,
what happened inside this place
and what happened
afterwards?
This attack has reignited old
debates here
about terrorism and about
migration. Hundreds
of thousands of people have made
a similar
journey as this attacker, only
one has chosen
his same path.
HARI SREENIVASAN: German
officials say two
of the five wounded victims have
life-threatening
injuries.
Back in this country, longtime
FOX News chair
and CEO Roger Ailes is
reportedly on his way
out, in the face of sexual
harassment claims.
NPR reports he's being ousted,
and The New
York Times says buyout talks are
in the advanced
stages. The Daily Beast says he
will get at
least a $40 million paycheck.
Former FOX anchor
Gretchen Carlson has sued Ailes,
alleging
he made advances and then fired
her when she
complained. Ailes denies it.
In economic news, the
International Monetary
Fund warned that Britain's
departure from
the European Union will cut into
global growth
this year and next. At the same
time, it said
the U.S. and Chinese economies
won't sustain
much damage.
And on Wall Street today, the
Dow Jones industrial
average gained 26 points to
close at 18559.
But the Nasdaq fell 19 points,
and the S&P
500 slipped three.
The International Organization
for Migration
reported today that almost 3,000
migrants
and refugees have drowned
attempting to cross
the Mediterranean Sea this year.
Most of these
deaths have taken place on the
route linking
North Africa with Italy. And
among those who've
survived the sea voyage, an
astonishing 92
percent of all migrants say they
have experienced
violence; 50 percent say they
have been held
against their will by militia or
gangsters.
Those figures come from surveys
done by Doctors
Without Borders, the
international medical
charity known by its French
acronym, MSF.
Just today, 2,500 more people
have been rescued.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant is now
aboard an MSF rescue ship,
Aquarius, and he
filed this report from off the
coast of Libya.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Nearly four
days after leaving
Sicily, the Aquarius is on
station in international
waters, northeast of the Libyan
capital, Tripoli,
just outside that volatile
country's territorial
limits.
After a recent surge of
migrants, it's all
quiet. But then, from the
bridge, they spot
an overcrowded, flimsy rubber
dinghy limping
towards Italy. The Aquarius
launches its rigid
inflatables, or ribs, as men on
board a Libyan
fishing boat observe
proceedings. One of the
ribs is carrying life jackets to
prevent drownings
during the rescue.
First mate Andreas Tsigkanas:
ANDREAS TSIGKANAS, First Mate:
They started
by distributing the life jackets
to the people
in the boat. And as soon as all
the people
wear life jackets, they will
start embarkation
in one boat, around 18 people at
a time. The
other boat will stand by there
for safety
and to calm them down.
MAN: Aquarius, boat number one,
coming back
with 1-8 persons.
MAN: Copy, 1-9. Green light.
Over.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Every one of
the 107 West
African men is given a welcoming
health check
by MSF veteran Erna Rijnierse.
DR. ERNA RIJNIERSE, Doctors
Without Borders:
We want to see everybody in
their eyes to
see how they are feeling, if
they are not
dehydrated, if they're not
having a fever.
And I smell, if they don't smell
of fuel,
because the combination of fuel
and salty
water makes very nasty burns.
So, if we smell fuel, we put
them under a
shower straight away and WE give
them clean
clothes.
Mark, this gentleman smells of
fuel. Jacob,
fuel.
MALCOLM BRABANT: There is a vast
difference
between these migrants and those
who crossed
from Turkey to Greece. The Greek
arrivals
usually had a mobile phone, some
money, and
a bag. The Africans have
nothing, apart from
the clothes they're wearing.
Without exception, they have
been stripped
of possessions in Libya.
Nurse Jacob Goldberg.
JACOB GOLDBERG, Nurse: They are
often held
against their will in places
where they are
very cramped. They have things
taken away
from them. There are armed
guards. And any
possessions they do have get
taken away just
because they're not allowed to
have anything
on them. They don't have enough
food to eat,
or enough water to drink, enough
clean water
to drink, let alone have the
possibility to
have personal effects or
personal items.
So, by the time they get to us
on the rubber
boats, they have got nothing,
and they're
hungry and they're thirsty and
they're desperate.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Europe would
categorize most
of the Africans taking this
journey as economic
migrants, because they
originally left home
with the intention of seeking
greater prosperity.
But, once in Libya, they became
desperate
to flee the country's
lawlessness, false imprisonment,
and what in some cases amounts
to slavery,
according to Ruby Pratka, of SOS
Mediterranee,
an NGO whose personnel operates
the rescue
ribs.
She says there is intense
suffering for tens
of thousands of these people.
RUBY PRATKA, SOS Mediterranee:
You have forced
extralegal confinement. You have
sexual assault.
You have whippings. Many, many,
many of the
people I have spoken to Here
have said That
there's modern slavery in Libya.
They were systematically
kidnapped and subjected
to forced labor on farms, in
houses, on building
sites. They would work for long
periods, and
then get a gun held to their
head when they
demanded their salary.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Below-decks, an
advocacy
specialist takes testimony from
three young
French-speaking Africans. MSF
has interviewed
hundreds of people who have said
that Libyan
gangs use kidnapping and torture
as a way
to extort money from the
migrants' families,
before forcing them into
unseaworthy vessels.
Mohammed Kamara, from Ivory
Coast, says he
was falsely imprisoned four
times.
MOHAMMED KAMARA, Refugee
(through translator):
The first prison, I was banged
up for at least
three months. The second prison,
I have done
at least six months. In the
third, I also
did a bit of time, and then
there was a fourth,
but I can't go into it in much
detail.
Libya is not a good country.
It's because
I wanted to come out of Libya
that I'm here
today. I had the opportunity,
and that's why
I risked my life to be here
today.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Relieved that
they have been
saved from the deep, his friend
Mustafa Diaby
has a message for those people
back home who're
contemplating following in their
footsteps.
MUSTAFA DIABY, Refugee (through
translator):
I have a big message. My message
is to stay
at home. And if you really want
to come to
Europe, save the money and fly.
Otherwise,
going through the desert and
ending up in
Libya is bad advice, my friends.
I even put it in my prayers. I
don't want
my own friends to take this
road. It's extremely
dangerous. When we crossed the
desert, there
were 24 passengers who didn't
make it.
MALCOLM BRABANT: At the stern in
the middle
of the day, some of the vessel's
Muslim guests
give thanks for their
deliverance. Their rescue
by the Aquarius guarantees them
passage to
Italy, although they will be
starting their
new lives with nothing, except
possibly a
crippling debt to the smuggling
gangs.
They're heading to a Europe that
is reluctant
to accept them, especially
politicians who
believe that humanitarian
missions like this
are helping the traffickers to
profit.
DR. ERNA RIJNIERSE: People don't
make this
journey for fun. People make
this journey
is because they don't see any
other way out.
And as long as that situation
continues, people
will continue to come.
And we are here at sea is
because people die
at sea. And it's very easy to
say, these people
shouldn't come. But these people
who say that
have never been in a position
where they have
to flee.
RUBY PRATKA: I don't think any
rational person
would decide to cross the
Mediterranean Sea
in a boat that I wouldn't even
put on a nice
calm lake back in Canada, if
they felt they
had any other safe alternative.
If, by calling us a taxi
service, they're
acknowledging that we pulled
people out of
the water who otherwise would
have drowned,
then we're happy to be a taxi
service.
MALCOLM BRABANT: After about
three hours on
board the Aquarius, the Italian
authorities,
who are controlling the
operation in this
part of the Med, decide that the
migrants
should be transferred to a coast
guard vessel
heading back to base.
What these people didn't know
was that the
weather had been about to change
for the worse
when they were rescued by James
Mahoney and
his colleagues.
JAMES MAHONEY, SOS Mediterranee:
These guys
were very lucky, in the sense
that rescue
vessels were in the area. And if
they'd left
a little later, they may have
been caught
up in this weather, and the
outcome of the
operation would be a bit more
uncertain.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Despite the
risk of drowning,
the number of people prepared to
take a chance
upon the waves is increasing.
So far this year, the number of
people who
have managed to get into Europe
is around
about a quarter-of-a-million,
many of taking
this extremely perilous route.
But one in
100 of every one of those people
who have
attempted that crossing has
died. To date
in 2016, the numbers of deaths
at sea is up
by 50 percent on the same period
last year.
According to the International
Organization
for Migration, that's 3,000
deaths too many,
and, it says, Europe has to do
more to save
lives.
As this rather undramatic, but
successful
operation reached its
conclusion, there remained
one last task, to mark and
puncture the thin
rubber dinghy to show that its
passengers
were safe and to deny smugglers
the chance
of recycling the craft.
Fate had decreed that this
marble-colored
shape wouldn't mark yet another
watery mass
grave.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
off the Libyan coast.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Malcolm is
still at sea
with MSF, and will have more
reporting for
us in the coming days on rescues
and recoveries
in the Mediterranean.
That's it from Washington for
now. I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
GWEN IFILL: And from here in
Cleveland, I'm
Gwen Ifill.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
But stay with us. We will be
right back here
at 8:00 p.m. Eastern for live
special coverage
of the Republican National
Convention.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy --
she's Gwen
Ifill. I'm Judy Woodruff.
And for all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you. And we will see you right
back here soon.